# RANISH Implementation Notes
This notes document my research on the implementation details of Ranish Partition Manager version 2.37.

# 1 Advanced Boot Manager
The Advanced Boot Manager is implemented in MANAGER.ASM and conists of two parts:

* an intermediate loader (IPL)
* the main boot manager (ADV)

The IPL gets written to the master boot record (MBR) by the partition manager PART.EXE. The ADV lives in its own partition and is also installed by PART.EXE.

When using Advanced Boot Manager the partition information is not stored in the MBR anymore. Instead it is stored in the data area of ADV. The partition table stored in MBR is adjusted by ADV on every boot to reflect the boot configuration selected by the user.

Partitions get a "tag" number. That number represents the position in the list of partitions when displayed by the partition manager. It is also used by the advanced boot manager to lookup a partition in the partition record list.

Beside the partition to boot, up to three additional partitions can be made visible by including them in the adjusted MBR. A few options exist:
* NEXT: make the partition after the boot partition visible
* PREV: make the partition before the boot partition visible
* LAST: make the past partition visible
* LAST3: mathe the three last partitions visible

ADV is capable to simulate keypresses by injecting keys into the keyboard buffer before booting a partition. This is useful e.g. to simulate F8 keypress when booting DOS / Windows.


## 1.1 IPL
At boot, the BIOS loads the MBR and the contained IPL into memory starting at 0000:7C00. BIOS then executes the IPL with entry vector 0000:7C00. IPL then immediately relocates itself and the MBR to address 0000:0600. After that, memory layout is as follows (addresses in hex, sizes in decimal):
```Memory layout after IPL relocated itself and MBR
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Address  | Size | Description                              |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:0600 |  432 | IPL code                                 |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:07B0 |    4 | LBA disk sector of ADV                   |
| 0000:07B4 |    4 | reserved (unused)                        |
| 0000:07B8 |    1 | currently active ADV menu entry          |
| 0000:07B9 |    1 | ADV boot options (unused)                |
| 0000:07BA |    4 | ADV magic value "ABM3"                   |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:07BE |   64 | partition table                          |
| 0000:07FE |    2 | boot sector magic value 55 AA            |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:0800 | 8192 | ... ADV code will be loaded here ...     |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:2800 | 2048 | ... ADV data will be loaded here ...     |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
| 0000:3000 |      | shared BSS section IPL / ADV             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
```
An important value stored in the MBR is the starting LBA disk sector of the ADV. After relocating itself IPL first loads the ADV data to memory address 0000:2800 and then ADV code to memory address 0000:0800. ADV data is stored on disk before ADV code. ADV currently is 20 sectors in size: 4 data sectors followed by 16 code sectors.

IPL and ADV communicate over the BSS area starting at 0000:3000 and the area starting at 0000:07B0. IPL tells ADV some important information such as the disk number the system started from and the active boot menu entry.

## 1.2 ADV
The ADV is stored in a "raw" partition in its binary form. Beside the ADV that partition contains no data. Therfore the minimum size of that partition is the size of the ADV itself, currently 20 sectors.

The ADV data stored on disc is 2k in size. It contains the following content:
```
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Address  | Size | Description                              |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
|      0000 |   15 | signature "AdvBootManager\0"             |
|      000F |    1 | version "3"                              |
|      0010 |    1 | default menu entry                       |
|      0011 |    1 | menu timeout (defaults to 0)             |
|      0012 |    2 | option flags                             |
|           |      |   1 = check for virus                    |
|           |      |   2 = clear screen                       |
|           |      |   4 = ignore unused ???                  |
|           |      |   8 = use default menu entry             |
|      0014 |    2 | menu password "encrypted"                |
|      0016 |   26 | --- reserved ---                         |
|      0030 |   32 | menu title                               |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
|      0050 | 1280 | 16 menu records, each 80 bytes           |
|      0550 |  512 | 32 partition records, each 16 bytes      |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
|      0750 |  176 | --- reserved ---                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
```
The different configurations options can be set with PART.EXE.

ADV "checks for viruses" by inspecting the interrupt vectors 0H-1DH, 4AH and 70H to point to C000:0000. If otherwise it prints a virus warning.

On every boot ADV saves the selected boot entry in the MBR. It is preselected if the option flag "use default menu entry" is NOT set. If it es set always the menu entry given in "default menu entry" is selected.

The password is "encrypted" in a 16-bit hash value. The same password is used for all menu items with password protection flag set.


### Partition Records
Partition records have the following 16 byte structure:
```
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Address  | Size | Description                              |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
|      0000 |    2 | operating system id                      |
|      0002 |    1 | partition tag number                     |
|      0003 |    1 | row number in MBR in partition list      |
|      0004 |    4 | --- reserved ---                         |
|      0008 |    4 | LBA sector number                        |
|      0012 |    4 | number of sectors                        |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
```

### Menu Records
Menu records have the following 80 byte structure:
```
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|  Address  | Size | Description                              |
|-----------+------+------------------------------------------|
|      0000 |    1 | boot type                                |
|           |      |   0 = menu record not used               |
|           |      |   1 = boot a partition                   |
|           |      |   2 = chainload MBR from next disk       |
|           |      |   3 = boot from floppy                   |
|      0001 |    1 | options                                  |
|           |      |   0 = do not require passwort to boot    |
|           |      |   1 = require password to boot           |
|      0002 |   30 | menu item title                          |
|      0020 |    1 | associated partition tag number          |
|      0021 |    1 | additional visible partitions            |
|           |      |   0 = none                               |
|           |      |   1 = last                               |
|           |      |   2 = next                               |
|           |      |   3 = prev                               |
|           |      |   4 = last 3                             |
|      0022 |   14 | --- reserverd ---                        |
|      0030 |    2 | number of bytes to inject into keyb buf  |
|      0032 |   30 | key sequence injected to keyboard        |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+
```

